Hello friends
In this video let us discuss about linear search or
sequential search.
So assume that I am going to give you a book
which has unordered page numbers and it has
100 pages like the first page is marked as number
The second page marked this number 89 and so on.
That is the point is it is randomly numbered.
Now I am going to ask you to find the
page number 50
What will you do Since the page numbers are
unordered we don't have any choice other than searching
it page by page
For example take the first page
If it is page number 50 we are done
But if it is not then we have to go
to the next page and do the same process until
we find the page number 50
And if we run out of page we can conclude
that the page number 50 is not in the book
So this is exactly what is linear search or
sequential search that is
We have a book with unordered page numbers
and we have to find a particular page so we
have to check each and every page from the first
page to the last page till we find it so
see this array with five elements we have to find the
key 50
So we will compare the key with first element
It is not the key
So go on and compare the key with second element
It is also not the same
So go on and compare the key with third Element
again it is not the same
So check the fourth element
Again the comparison fails
So compare the key with fifth element And now it
is true
The fifth element is the key
So we have found the key by comparing the key
with each element from first to last
Now let us search for another key 20. First Element
10 is not the key
Second Element 30 is not the key
Third element 60 is also not the key
Fourth is also not and fifth is also not 20
which is the key
And since we have completed the array we can say that the
key is not present in the array so that is linear
search or sequential search
Now let us see how to implement linear search
Here we have the main function and the function linear
search
So execution begins from the main function
First let us declare the array page number with elements 86
91 34 50 and zero and the key as 50
So we want to search the key 50 in the array
page number
And we will call the function Linear Search which will
perform linear search operation
We will pass the array its size and key to be
searched into the function
And the function will return one
if the key is found otherwise it will return zero
So we have
If linear search of page number comma size comma key equal
to one print search found else
search not found
So the function is called and control gets here
And the page number is stored in arr and size
in size and key in key
Now we can simply perform Linear search using a for
loop
We will iterate over the array. And
In each iteration we will compare the key and the
element
So declare an integer variable
i and we have the for loop for i equal to
zero i less than size
i++
So I will take the values
0123 and four and in first iteration i = 0 so check
If array of i that is arr of
zero equal to key which is 50 and it is
not so increment i and start the next iteration
Now i equal to one so check if arr of
one equal to 50. Again This if fails here.
So start the next iteration Now i equal to two and
check if arr of two equal to 50. Again if
failed So increment i and i equal to three now
in next iteration check if arr of three equal to
50 and it is. That is the key is found at index
three so return one And here in main function this
return value is one So if becomes true and prints
search found. Now let the key equal to 30 So let
us search for 30 in array page number. So
the function is called by passing the area size and key
and control gets here we will iterate over the
array and in each iteration we will compare the key
and the array element so declare the integer variable i
and we have the for loop for i equal to zero
i less than size
i++ and in first iteration equal to zero
So
check
If arr of i that is arr of zero equal
to key and it is not so increment i and
start next iteration
Now I equal to one so check if arr of
one equal to 30 again if fails here
So start the next iteration. Now I equal to two and
check if arr of two equal to 30 again it
fails
So increment i. So i equal to three now. In the next
iteration check if arr of three equal to 30 again
it fails so increment i and i becomes four now.
In next iteration check if arr of four
equal to 30 again it is not. So increment i
and i equal to five now and now check the condition
i less than size and five is not less than five
So this condition fails. That is we have completely traversed the array.
So control comes out of the for loop and returns
zero as the key was not found in the array. So
here in main function this returned value is zero which
is not equal to one
So if fails and control goes to else part and
prints search is not formed So that is linear search and
this is how we can implement it.
Now let us discuss about the time complexity of this
operation
The best case is when the keys present in the first
position.
Then only one iteration is needed
So the best case time complexity is order of one
The worst case is when the key is present in the
last position then we will need n iterations to find
it.
See here the key 50 is present in the fifth
position so we will need five iterations to find it
That is the size of the array. So the worst case
time complexity is order of n.